# Knowledge sharing within the New Zealand Government Common Web Platform: A knowledge management approach using communities of practice

by [Cam Findlay](cam@camfindlay.com), 26 May 2013

#### Abstract
> *When proposed, the Common Web Platform approach was well publicised in local IT periodicals. The following essay critics the information put forward in the New Zealand Computerworld article ["Local supplier Silverstripe wins all-of-govt web contract"](http://www.computerworld.co.nz/article/488609/local_supplier_silverstripe_wins_all-of-govt_web_contract/). The above article points at the efficiency, cost savings and code reuse benefits without addressing exactly how this would come about nor the likely barriers which might impede adoption and knowledge sharing on the CWP. Of key importance is an understanding that it is not simply a technical implementation that will foster cross-organisational, cross-sector website feature  and code collaboration as this only covers the explicit aspect of knowledge sharing. Rather, a strategic knowledge management approach which takes into account the organisational structure, culture and people aspects those involved in the CWP initiate is required (a personalisation strategy). This approach carried out in parallel with enabling software tools, documentation and sharing policy already provided by CWP allows a holistic 'explicit-tacit' strategic balance. A feasible approach to would be to utilise the existing SilverStripe CMS and Framework developer community of practice as a single shared practitioner space for both public and private sector developers. To give this abstract shared knowledge space a concise term, it is referred to in the Knowledge Management field as Ba (場), the Japanese concept of space. By using CoP and other enabling social software as Ba, it allows public and private sector IT developers using the CWP to come together as practitioners of SilverStripe CMS and Framework development. This context creates a constructive spiral of knowledge creation in which knowledge is first socialised between practitioners and later transformed into documents and more explicit forms of information to be shared. This is in turn consumed by practitioners, grows further ideas and returns to the process of socialisation. A more strategic Knowledge Management approach focused on people and culture first and foremost supported by workflow tools and policy will help to bridge the common knowledge silos and barriers to sharing that often occur around knowledge sharing within and across public sector agencies.*

Bell's (2013) article in New Zealand Computerworld sets out an all-of-government web initiative as part of 'Rethink Online', a Government effort to respond to the fast-paced technology and business environment the public sector finds itself part of (Department of Internal Affairs, 2011). The Common Web Platform's (CWP) innovative approach utilises reusable, open source code to gain procurement efficiencies and improved website consistency across government (Bell, 2013). Martin (2003, p. 56) points out "organisations … seek to gain quick wins in the guise of technological … solutions aimed at the capture and reuse of knowledge", however a more balanced, people focused approach to Knowledge Management (KM) is required to enable knowledge sharing and collaboration particularly within the public sector. This discussion aims to highlight that in order to gain the benefits mentioned in Bell's (2013) article, the CWP initiative needs to understand the diversity of knowledge strategies, structures and cultures of the government agencies (henceforth referred to as 'agencies') involved and identify common barriers to public sector knowledge sharing (Pardo, Cresswell, Thompson & Zhang, 2006). Only then can a knowledge enabling ecosystem be fostered that will see the CWP as a successful initiative both in cost savings and knowledge sharing (von Krogh, Ichijo & Nonaka, 2000).
The CWP is a collaborative partnership, initiated by the Department of Internal Affairs (DIA), built on open source software by Silverstripe using their content management system SilverStripe CMS and Framework, and delivered on hosting infrastructure by Revera (Bell, 2013). The initiative at a high level has already encouraged collaboration between the private and public sectors by way of the project's inception and core partners. DIA vision is that "[t]he Common Web Platform will facilitate higher levels of sharing and reuse of website features … between government departments, helping consistency and reducing costs" (Department of Internal Affairs, n.d., para. 8). However, the CWP technology stack only represents the explicit and techno-centric side of such a cross-boundary Knowledge Management initiative. Knowledge Management in this respect is defined as "the effective learning processes associated with … [the] sharing of human knowledge (tacit and explicit) that use appropriate technology and cultural environments to enhance an organisation's intellectual capital and performance" (Jashapara, 2011, p. 14). 

What must occur is to factor in the tacit and cultural aspects of knowledge (the experience people carry in their heads, often difficult to codify). According to many authors, (Jashapara, 2011; von Krogh et al., 2000; Pardo et al., 2006) this cultural aspect plays a greater role in successful Information and  Knowledge Management programmes. "[I]nterorgani[s]ational information systems development … depends heavily on understanding the factors that influence cross-boundary knowledge sharing" (Pardo et. al., 2006, p. 294). A key factor is an organisation's attitude towards the nature of knowledge and their Knowledge Management strategy (that may indeed be implicit and part of the 'way they do things'). This will affect the willingness and ability to share knowledge and collaborate on web features under the CWP initiate.

According to Hansen, Nohria and Tierney (1999), Knowledge Management strategies are focused in two broad and somewhat mutually exclusive categories, codification and personalisation. Firstly, codification promotes a cognitivist view of knowledge (knowledge as a thing that can be captured and transferred, also often referred to as information). This strategy sees knowledge objects such as documents and databases considered as more important than social knowledge exchange interactions (Jashapara, 2011). For example, a codification view of the CWP places importance on the technology tools such as code repositories (literally codified knowledge), documentation and policies (Bell, 2013). It is connecting people to tools. Secondly, a personalisation strategy sees a constructivist view of knowledge, framing knowledge assets as created, embodied and exchanged primarily in the social context of people and interactions (von Krogh et al., 2000). Connecting people to people.  The benefits of the CWP will be realised when "agencies build things of value on top of it" (Bell, 2013, para.10) suggesting it requires collaborative efforts of SilverStripe practitioner expertise and knowledge shared across boundaries of both public and private sector organisations (Bell, 2013). Hansen et al. (1999) explain that effectiveness is achieved by aligning one of the two Knowledge Management strategies with corporate strategy while also implementing to a lesser extent the secondary strategic Knowledge Management focus (a 80:20 split is recommended). This is connecting people to people and people to tools. For instance, the CWP could adopt a personalisation Knowledge Management strategic approach to assist agencies in "collaborating beyond organi[s]ational silos" (Asian Productivity Organisation, 2013). Given that the project from a vision level is about innovation and culture change in government along with supporting open source code repositories, documentation and policy an personalisation:codification configuration (as opposed to codification:personalisation) seems as though it would be the most effective,  though likely not easiest to implement given culture and change management required.

Hansen et al., (1999) agree that a corporate strategy of innovation is well aligned with a personalisation Knowledge Management strategy. This adds weight to the argument of focusing on the tacit and people aspects to encourage knowledge sharing and collaboration within the CWP. It should also be noted that organisations involved in the CWP operate in a zone of knowledge creation (Jashapara, 2011). This is a state where paradoxical concepts of cooperative versus competitive cultures and knowledge exploration versus exploitation are at a dynamic equilibrium and is often difficult state for organisations to reconcile due to fluctuation of perceived stability and uncertainty. This is however where the most valuable knowledge and learning takes place and the most complex problems get solved (Jasapara, 2011). For example, organisations like SilverStripe's (n.d.) state their core values as being open, creative, fresh and committed suggesting their ability to management uncertainty, collaborate and share across boundaries to capitalise on their intellectual capital (Jashapara, 2011). SilverStripe's Knowledge Management systems and processes are likely to focus on the interaction of people through mechanisms such as Communities of Practice (CoP) (Wenger et al., 2002) with supporting wiki's, expertise locators and documentation (Jashapara, 2011). Indeed, SilverStripe have built a thriving open source Community of Practice around the SilverStripe CMS and Framework (Schommer & Broschart, 2009). The SilverStripe developer community's diverse members from across the web industry engage in fluid sharing behaviour across boundaries (both physically and virtually) and is open to all sectors (public and private) interested in identifying themselves as practitioners of SilverStripe CMS and Framework development.

Research into public sector sees them often lagging in adapting to Knowledge Management practices (Cong & Pandya, 2003). The focus has been traditionally been on efficiency through cost leadership as a primary response to their mandated environment (Porter as cited in Jashapara, 2011). Public sector agencies are likely to favour a codification Knowledge Management strategy and as the Asian Productivity Organisation (2013) point out they also have to deal with mandated administration and policies as part of their culture. These factors result in a more bureaucratic structure and a culture of hoarding knowledge (silo-ing) when compared to organisations and open source communities such as SilverStripe (Martin, 2003). As an example, Bell's (2013) article mentions that CWP's main focus is providing cost savings in procurement. Agencies adopting the CWP will likely see the efficiency as the main benefit rather than improved knowledge sharing. Martin (2003) mentions that public sector agencies in theory agree with adopting Knowledge Management initiatives. However, in reality they struggle when it comes to the pragmatic implementation of these people based knowledge sharing practices. This is not always the case though, for instance DIA is part of the public sector and they seem to have adopted some successful Knowledge Management practices that has a potential to pave "the way … for Knowledge Management initiatives to be implemented in the public sector" (Cong & Pandya, 2003, p. 28). However not all agencies are as open to Knowledge Management as yet, this is an area which must be worked on in order for a successful CWP ecosystem. A key issue here is that "formal management and policy structures introduce barriers that prevent government agencies from achieving the ... benefits of knowledge sharing" (Pardo et al., 2006, p. 297). This will impact the CWP initiative in terms of resistance and barriers when it comes to agencies adopting it for their websites and participating in the knowledge sharing activities around it.

Public sector staff, according to Lips, O'Neill and Eppel (2011) often share the minimum of knowledge and usually on a 'need-to-know' basis as part of their culture. As a result the CWP initiative may not be adopted as smoothly or foster the kinds of knowledge sharing described by Bell's (2013) article. DIA acknowledge this stating they will "remove barriers to collaboration" (Department of Internal Affairs, 2011, p. 9). However, they do not specifically state these barriers or how they will be addressed. Knowledge Management literature highlights several recurring public sector barriers likely to impact the CWP. These include: seeing change as a threat, lack of trust, poor leadership, lack of aligned incentives, mandated policies (such as privacy), technological interoperability and misalignment of organisational paradigms (Cong & Pandya, 2003; Lips et al., 2011; Pardo et al., 2006; von Krogh et al., 2000). Bell (2013, para. 9) states "sharing will remain at each agency's discretion". Due to the mentioned barriers, the level of knowledge sharing that actually takes place may be inhibited. For instance, the CWP overcomes the technology interoperability barrier as it deploys a consistent, open source tool set and workflow for each agency (Bell, 2013). Unfortunately, public sector IT departments may perceive this as a threat, as experience and investment in existing technologies may be made obsolete with the CWP's introduction, affecting the professional identity of IT knowledge workers and IT managers looking to migrate to CWP. Therefore they may be resistant to adoption and keep sharing to a minimum (von Krogh et al., 2000). The cost savings and efficiency of the CWP look attractive however overcoming barriers may have hidden costs in terms of training and change management initiatives within and across agencies (Jashapara, 2011).

To overcome these barriers, building trust will be a key aspect of a knowledge enabling context and sharing across organisational boundaries (von Krogh et al., 2000). To gain this trusted and  knowledge empowered ecosystem, von Krogh et al. (2000) suggest the concept of Ba (場); the Japanese concept of physical, mental or virtual shared space for knowledge creation and exchange. Fostering a shared space in the form of Communities of Practice allows a culture of care to form by way of building interpersonal trust, getting access to help and expertise of other practitioners, mutual understanding and courage to experiment (von Krogh et al., 2000). These factors aid in easing the adoption of Knowledge Management initiatives and in the case of CWP will help move the public sector towards "a deeper form of collaborative behavior between agencies" (Lips et al., 2011, p. 256). Ba promotes engaging spaces where tacit knowledge sharing occurs informally and is transformed into more formal, explicit information (Jashapara, 2011). This transformation process underpins [Nonaka's (1994) knowledge creation spiral](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SECI_model_of_knowledge_dimensions). Knowledge begins as socially stored and tacit that is converted into codified explicit knowledge by externalising it (writing it down, telling it to others). Further, this externalised information can then be combined with other explicit knowledge (converted into best practices) and then internalised back to tacit knowledge embodied in individuals and institutionalised in organisations (in the form of individual learning leading to a state of organisational learning) ready to be shared socially once again and so the spiral continues (referred to as the SECI model of knowledge exchange). It is this process that promotes a learning culture and the pool of practitioner knowledge to grow. Nonaka's (1994) spiral contains four types of Ba or spaces that facilitate movement of knowledge: Originating Ba, Dialoguing Ba, Systemising Ba and Exercising Ba (Jashapara, 2011). As an example Originating Ba, refers to a place where "individuals share experiences" (von Krogh et al., 2000, p. 181) and could take the form of a Community of Practice such as the mentioned SilverStripe developer community (Schommer & Broschart, 2009). This could be championed as a space for public sector IT staff adopting the CWP to interact, share and learn from other SilverStripe practitioners in the wider community. Communities of Practice have proved valuable social learning systems in the public sector and "connect silos in various public divisions" (Jain, 2009, para. 6.1). This less formal community structure forms trusted relationships between members and would likely create the context and safe space for knowledge and code sharing around the SilverStripe CMS and Framework use in the CWP. It also exists outside of the source and control of many barriers to government knowledge sharing, that is, public sector structures, cultures and attitudes towards knowledge sharing.

In sum, the CWP is an effort to gain more consistent and cost efficient delivery of the New Zealand government's websites to provide better service to the public. However, gaining the benefits of the CWP may not be quite as straightforward as Bell's (2013) article suggests. The parties involved have their unique views of knowledge sharing and ability to engage in collaborative behaviours which will affect adoption and sharing. The creators of the initiate need to understand and respond to the structural and cultural diversity of agencies as these may be a source of barriers. Trusted relationships created through knowledge enabling spaces (Ba) such as Communities of Practice will be essential tools to encourage knowledge sharing (including the sharing ethos and practices around open source code). Here tacit knowledge can be exchanged and supported by explicit knowledge systems (such as those technology tools already provided by CWP) and will aid in the realisation of the benefits expressed in Bell's (2013) article for an all-of-government website platform which is cost effective and promotes a collaborative approach within the public sector around code reuse and website features. Technology itself cannot enable cross-boundary knowledge sharing, it is people's collective know-how that will drive a more innovative approach to Government web initiatives.

## References
Asian Productivity Organization. (2013). Knowledge management for the public sector. Tokyo, Japan: Asian Productivity Organization. Retrieved from http://www.apo-tokyo.org/publications/files/Knowledge%20Management%20for%20the%20Public%20Sector%20(2013).pdf

Bell, S. (2013). Local supplier Silverstripe wins all-of-govt web contract. Retrieved May 2, 2013 from http://www.computerworld.co.nz/article/488609/local_supplier_silverstripe_wins_all-of-govt_web_contract/

Cong, X., & Pandya, K. (2003). Issues of knowledge management in the public sector. Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management, 1(2), 25-33.

Department of Internal Affairs. (n.d.). Common web platform: An overview of the new online service. Retreived May 10, 2013 from http://ict.govt.nz/programme/rethink-online/implementing-rethink-online/common-web-services/

Department of Internal Affairs. (2011). Rethink online: A new approach for government use of and investment in online channels. Retreived May 10, 2013 from http://ict.govt.nz/library/rethinkonline_0.pdf

Hansen, M., Nohria, N., & Tierney, T. (1999). What's your strategy for managing knowledge? Harvard Business Review, 77(2) 106-116.

Jain, P. (2009), Knowledge Management in e-government. Journal of Knowledge Management Practice, 10(4). Retrieved from at: http://www.tlainc.com/jkmpv10n409.htm

Jashapara, J. (2011). Knowledge management: An integrated approach. (2nd ed.). Harlow, England: Financial Times Prentice Hall.

Lips, M., O'Neill, R., & Eppel, E. (2011). Cross-agency collaboration in New Zealand: An empirical study of information sharing practices, enablers and barriers in managing for shared social outcomes. International Journal of Public Administration, 34(4), 255-266.

Martin, B. (2003). Knowledge management and local government: Some emerging trends. 
Asia Pacific Management Review, 8(1), 43-58.

Nonaka, I. (1994). A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization Science, 5(1), 14–37.

Pardo, T., Cresswell, A., Thompson, F., & Zhang, J. (2006). Knowledge sharing in cross-boundary information system development in the public sector. Information Technology and Management, 7(4), 293-313.

Schommer, I., & Broschart, S. (2009). Silverstripe: The complete guide to cms development. West Sussex, England : Wiley.

Silverstripe (n.d.). Philosophy. Retrieved May 12, 2013 from http://www.silverstripe.com/about-us/philosophy/

von Krogh, G., Ichijo, K., Nonaka, I. (2000). Enabling knowledge creation: How to unlock the mystery of tacit knowledge and release the power of innovation. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Wenger, E., McDermott, R. A., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide to managing knowledge. Boston, MS: Harvard Business School Press

