# How does learning occuring in open source communities?: A social constructivist psychology of learning

by [Cam Findlay](cam@camfindlay.com), 28 April 2014

#### Abstract
> *A great deal of learning takes place in open source communities. A vast majority of this learning is not through writen explicit knowledge exchange, rather passed on through a mentoring relationship through Communities of Practice and socailly constructed processes. Those already inside the community, challenge those entering to learn the processes and collaborate in the way culturally 'things are done' in the open source community. This may be through observation initially, and later by collaborating on shared tasks. It is this 'cognitive stretch' where learning occurs according to socail constructivist theorists. This highlights that knowlege is stored inside communities, that is, it is situated knowldge (a social database). Knowldge is passed on from practitioner to practitioner by ensuring novice participate meaningfully in open source communities.*

Open source software (OSS) is widely used by organisations and powers a large portion of the internet (Fang & Neufeld, 2009). How learning and contributions to OSS is enabled is of importance to curators of these projects to ensure learning is effective, the software's features are progressed and projects remain alive. One such OSS project is SilverStripe, a web development framework. Software developers that use and contribute to this OSS form a Community of Practice (CoP) (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002). This discussion looks to identify theoretical underpinnings of CoPs that explain how ongoing contributions and learning occur in OSS communities. Firstly, what a CoP is and it's relation to OSS will be explained. Next, the theories of Social Constructivism (Vygotsky, 1978) and Situated Cognition (Lave, 1991) that enable a social perspective of learning will be discussed. How these psychological theories are enacted within CoPs to foster learning and some limitations will be explored. Examples will be drawn from the authors own experience within the SilverStripe community.

According to Wenger (2000), CoPs are informal groups of people mutually engaging towards a joint enterprise by utilising a shared repertoire of knowledge. Simply put, CoP members pursue a common goal or domain of knowledge, collaboratively and in the process negotiate a set of competencies used by practitioners, as such, OSS communities such as SilverStripe are CoPs. SilverStripe community members share knowledge and work collaboratively towards creating the SilverStripe software using computer mediated communication tools. In CoPs, there are practitioners who are considered inside the community and those on the margins that are not (Wenger et al., 2002). This boundary is based on participation and being able to demonstrate the competencies of the community (Fang & Neufeld, 2009). Novices at the periphery begin to learn by observation and interaction with people and artifacts laced with the sociocultural knowledge of the community (Marsh & Ketterer, 2005). For instance, in the SilverStripe community, informal software development days (hackfests) and training workshops are run on a regular basis. Experts and novices interact socially while working on meaningful projects, sharing code and experience. Through the theories of Constructivism, it is in the social fabric of CoPs that learning takes place, allowing learners to construct cognitive tools to solve complex and unstructured real world problems (Ertmer & Newby, 1993). This contrasts the notion that knowledge is simply transferred to learners as they process information for later recall as in the Cognitivist view of learning (Krause, Bochner, & Duchesne, 2006).

Vygotsky's work in the 1920-30s gave rise to Social Constructivism, his theories sought out to understand how the social could be combined with the individual's mind (Edwards, 2005). Further, he proposed that cognition is a product of the sociocultural context that a learner participates within (Vygotsky, 1978). Learners have an experience within society then actively construct their own meaning of the knowledge from the experience. Learning in social constructivist terms is about sensemaking (Edwards, 2005). Key to Vygotsky's work is the role of language. Language is first used to navigate the sociocultural environment where knowledge resides, over time language is internalised leading to the learners cognitive development and integration into societies practices (Marsh & Ketterer, 2005). Language becomes the internal voice or cognition to solve problems, reflect metacognitively upon learning and the tool to further engage with the sociocultural environment (Hung & Der-Thanq, 2001). For instance, when novices enter the SilverStripe community there is technical jargon, acronyms and terminology relating to software development which must be discovered through social interaction with other OSS members. Over time, novices make sense of the language embedded in the community and use it as a tool when discussing how to use or contribute code within SilverStripe. Learning the terminology of SilverStripe has allowed the contributor to develop understanding about how things are done and cross the boundary of the community. This highlights Vygotsky's fundamental concept of social constructivism: learning occurs before development, as opposed to other theorists such as Piaget who argued the reverse from the Psychological Constructivist perspective (Krause et al., 2006).

Another of Vygotsky's (1978) contributions is the concept of the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) defined as the difference "between the actual development level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving … in collaboration with more capable peers" (p. 33). Vygotsky's ZPD bears a similarity to Wenger's (2000) explanation of how learning occurs at the boundaries of CoP. Novices at CoP boundaries enter a state of tension between their existing experiences and the competence required to be recognised belonging to the community (Wenger, 2000). If learners attempt a competence too complex (far outside the ZPD) learning will not occur, even with peer guidance the task may be beyond reach given what the learner already knows. Further, if a tasks is too easy it may not challenge the learner enough for learning to occur (Wenger, 2000). It is in meaningful activities just outside the ZPD that stretch learners abilities and move them to engage with peers, meet this challenge and set new ZPD horizons for future learning (Bockarie, 2002). For example, SilverStripe novices attempting to learn the more complex concepts of the software without a basic understanding of object-orientated programming will struggle to learn they may get feedback from forums from other members however the answers may be outside the learner's ZPD (Bockarie, 2002). Engagement alone does not result in learning, it must be the right level of learning engagement matched to learners needs.

Building on the Social Constructivism, another theory of learning relating to CoPs is Situated Cognition (Handley, Sturdy, Fincham, & Clark, 2006). Like Social Constructivism, Situated Cognition sees knowledge as connected to the social environment, and adds the extra dimension that knowledge cannot be abstracted from the sociocultural context it is linked to otherwise it loses meaning and becomes difficult to learn (Harris, 2006). Put another way, Situated Cognition posits that knowing something cannot be separated from practicing it, the social environment in essence becomes a social container for knowledge in action (Wenger, 2000). For instance, simply reading a book about software programming is unlikely to lead to meaningful learning of SilverStripe without actively writing software code. As Ertmer and Newby (1993) put it "experiences are not … structured … into declarative knowledge and then stored in the head" (p. 56). Situated knowledge is socially distributed (Hung & Der-Thanq, 2001) and consists of community members tacit know-how and culturally produced artifacts (Marsh & Ketterer, 2005). This is the sociocultural embodiment of the collective knowledge and competence that has been developed by experienced community members. In the case of SilverStripe, the competency of how to work with the OSS. "OSS developers learn from one another by communicating and sharing knowledge and experience … and social artifacts" (Fang & Neufeld, 2009, p. 15). However, it must be pointed out that this view on learning takes longer to orchestrate, as it understanding of learners diverse pre-existing knowledge and self-regulation when creating learning experiences (Krause et al., 2006).

Central to Situated Cognition is Legitimate Peripheral Participation (LPP) which proposes that learning initially occurs at the boundaries through observation and engagement, over time the learner moves towards full participation (Lave, 1991). LPP involves the pedagogical approach of Cognitive Apprenticeship, the role of the teacher becomes facilitative in "modeling and coaching … toward expert performance" (Ertmer & Newby, 1993). The approach is learner-centric, teachers become facilitators providing scaffolding (Krause et al., 2006). Scaffolding refers to experts providing meaningful tasks to the novice that once practiced enables learners to solve similar problems independently (Bockarie, 2002). The novice gradually learns the practices of the community, becomes a full participant and develops a sense of identity (Lave, 1991). Fang and Neufeld (2009) explain this begins a learning cycle, that is, the more a learner identifies with the community, the more they participate in learning the knowledge contained within that community which in turn further develops their identity. As Wenger (2000) exclaims "if knowing is an act of belonging, then our identities are a key structuring element of how we know" (p. 238). For example, in the SilverStripe community novices often work through tutorial projects and get their questions answered by experts in the online forums. This provides scaffolding or guidance of how to write quality code in a meaningful context. Once the learner has developed a level of competence, experts may suggest that the learner is able to contribute code to enhance the SilverStripe project itself. Over time the learners becomes a full practitioner, gaining access to further responsibilities and learning. One caveat with LPP however is that not all learners will (or even want to) progress into full participation within the community (Handley et al., 2006). As pointed out by Wenger et al. (2002), a good community allows many levels of participation.

OSS communities demonstrate that they are CoPs in that members are collaborative participants towards a topic they have passion about and wish to learn how to become a more competent practitioners through social interaction. There are key psychologies and pedagogical ideas that enable learning within such contexts. Social Constructivism explains learning through language, sense making and interaction with the sociocultural environment. With the aid of experts within the community and tasks stretching the learner's ZPD, novices become encultured into communities where knowledge resides. Further, Situated Cognition follows a similar path allowing LPP through Cognitive Apprenticeships, scaffolding and building the learner's sense of identity as a means of continued learning. The SilverStripe OSS community requires participation in constructing software code to gain further opportunities to learn and move more fully into the core of the practice of being a SilverStripe practitioner. Constructivist theories of learning help explain why learning occurs in OSS and how it might continue by ensuring novices are actively engaged in meaningful tasks by existing community members and that knowledge is passed between practitioners.

## References
Bockarie, A. (2002). The potential of Vygotsky's contributions to our understanding of cognitive apprenticeship as a process of development in adult vocational and technical education. Journal of Career and Technical Education, 19(1). Retrieved from http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/JCTE/v19n1/bockarie.html

Edwards, A. (2005). Let’s get beyond community and practice: the many meanings of learning by participating. The Curriculum Journal, 16(1), 49–65.

Ertmer, P., & Newby, T. (1993). Behaviorism, Cognitivism, Constructivism: Comparing critical features from an instructional design perspective. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 6(4), 50–72.

Fang, Y., & Neufeld, D. (2009). Understanding sustained participation in open source software projects. Journal of Management Information Systems, 25(4), 9–50.

Handley, K., Sturdy, A., Fincham, R., & Clark T. (2006). Within and beyond communities of practice: Making sense of learning through participation, identity and practice. Journal of Management Studies, 43(3), 641–653. 

Harris, C. (2006). Learning and innovation in communities of practice. Retrieved April 20, 2014, from http://www.seachangecop.org/node/1240

Hung, D., & Der-Thanq, C. (2001). Situated cognition, Vygotskian thought and learning from the communities of practice perspective: Implications for the design of web-based e-learning. Educational Media International, 38(1), 3–12.

Krause, K., Bochner, S., & Duchesne, S. (2006). Educational psychology for learning and teaching (2nd ed.). South Melbourne, Victoria: Thomson.

Lave, J. (1991). Situating learning in communities of practice. In L. Resnick, J. Levine, and S. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 63–82). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Marsh, G., & Ketterer, J. (2005). Situating the zone of proximal development. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 8(2). Retrieved from http://www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/summer82/marsh82.htm

Vygotsky, L. (1978). Interaction between learning and development. In Mind and society (pp. 79–91). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Wenger, E. (2000). Communities of practice and social learning systems. Organization, 7(2), 225–246

Wenger, E., McDermott, R. A., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice: A guide to managing knowledge. Boston, MS: Harvard Business School Press.
