# 3. Licensing and copyright

## 3.1 Licensing
Licensing and copyright, although related are very much distinct concepts. Licensing concerns itself with two things.
Who "owns" the code, and who has the right to use it. When a creator develops code they "own" the code. Put another way,
they hold the code's copyright, and are the copyright holder. If they would like to let others use the code, they would
grant them a "license" to do so. Such a license would grant a bundle of rights to another person. For instance, the
right to use, modify, or redistribute. This license is generally provided in writing along with the code and states the
terms under which the code may be used. Most common are the attribution and share-alike clauses. If you later
redistribute or improve the code this must also be released under the same license and include a copy of the original
license text. While we advocate for the [Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD)](http://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause)
license in the SilverStripe community, there are other licenses that could be considered such as the General Public
License (GPL), MIT, Creative Commons and public domain licenses. Each have their own pros and cons. Something to be
aware of is that code shared without FOSS license considerations is not reusable and if you encounter modules without
license you should contact the maintainer to add one before you include in your project.

## 3.2 Copyright
In most open source projects (although not all), copyright is held by the individual code contributors. So, for example,
while the Microsoft Corporation may own the right to Microsoft Windows (and thus upon purchasing it, you receive a
license for its use), the rights to module code for the SilverStripe CMS, on the other hand, are held by many individual
contributors from around the world who have created and contributed to the shared code, released under open source
licenses. In terms of code created in the New Zealand public sector, unless contracted out of "the Crown is the first
owner of any copyright subsisting in any work created by a person who is employed or engaged by the Crown, under a
contract of service, apprenticeship, or a contract for services" (Crown Copyright, 2014). Therefore, it is important to
ensure that if the code will be owned by the agency, that it is licensed when shared under a suitable open source
license. For example most SilverStripe CMS code is distributed under the BSD license. This is considered a highly
permissive license and good for wide reuse of code in the non-profit and private sector (Minn√©e, 2012). In the case
where the copyright will be owned by a contracted vendor, again in order to ensure the code is correctly shared, the
vendor (on the agency's behalf) should provide an appropriate open source license alongside the code in a public
repository. If this is not carried out code remains under the vendors copyright and non-intentional breaches of New
Zealand copyright laws could occur (Crown Copyright, 2014).

## 3.3 Accepting contributions from the community
Project documentation should clearly state the license under that the module code is distributed under and that any code
publicly contributed to (e.g. pull requests, code comments or patches) must be licensed under the same terms. This is
not uncommon in open source projects and is referred to as "terms of contribution". Under such terms, either the
individual contributor will retain the copyright, and their publicly distributed code is licensed under the same terms
as the code they are contributing to. Alternatively, the maintainer will request that copyright be assigned to them at
such time they will license the code under the same terms as the repository. This gives a legal authority to accept
contributions in the form of pull requests and other community contributed code. Either way, the rights and freedoms of
the shared code remain the same, all can reuse, modify and redistribute.
