# 4. Ownership and maintenance 
A key concern that was raised at the code sharing workshop ([See Appendix A](10_appendix_a.md)) was that of ownership and responsibility of shared code. The simple answer to this concern is that once code is released under an appropriate open source license, there is a *shared responsibility* of those that use the module to work collaboratively on improving the feature set, fix bugs, and upgrade the code over time (Morgan & Finnegan, 2014; Polley, 2007). This is why having the shared code stored in the most publicly accessible way is important. The social coding platform, GitHub, is highly suitable for this and agencies should look towards procuring a free organisational account. This allows any SilverStripe CMS developer to provide improvements to the shared code and this is done through a controlled process called a 'pull request' which is simply an external proposal to incrementally improve the code. The maintainer of the GitHub account can review the pull request, provide feedback to the contributors and can either accept or reject the work back into the shared code repository once they have peer reviewed and tested the code. Incremental updates over time help keep the code compatible with the SilverStripe CMS core and further reduces the risk of a major rewrite being required in the future. Where upgrades are required for modules, there may be options for joint projects between the public and private sector users of the code, or the community itself may work towards upgrading it if it is particularly useful code. All parties benefit from the shared responsibility model of code released under FOSS licenses in public coding spaces.