# 5. Code Repositories
## 5.1 Version control and git
Version control allows multiple contributors to software code by allowing small bundles of work to be committed by individual developers to a project over time. Think of it like track-changes for document files, however much more useful as it allows multiple authors working on the document simultaneously and avoids having to pass the document back and forth via some other communication mechanism (email for example). One such version control system (VCS) called 'Git' has become one of the most widely used throughout the world (Git, 2015). Git is a distributed VCS that allows many developers to work simultaneously on the same project code by allowing multiple branches and incremental improvements to be peer reviewed and included back to the project. This distributed nature. Git is utilised as the VCS on the CWP through the use of a private code repository tool called 'GitLab' (henceforth referred to as 'CWP GitLab' due to it's similar name to the social coding platform GitHub). Git is the underlying technology of both CWP GitLab, GitHub and many other social coding platform where FOSS code is shared and contributed to.

## 5.2 What is GitHub?
[GitHub](http://github.com/) is a social coding platform that allows teams to collaborate among themselves or with the general public and has quickly become the go-to social network for the FOSS community. For example, the govt.nz website has a organisational GitHub account where they release their FOSS modules and tools for the CWP. Code is grouped by organisations, which can consist of teams, that maintain repositories of code. The SilverStripe CMS core and many of the modules utilised on the CWP are maintained and actively worked on by the community via GitHub. It is in effect the social network of the SilverStripe CMS community (complemented by other digital channels such as mailing lists, forums and IRC chat). GitHub is based on the VCS known as [Git](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Git_(software). In essence, Git keeps a running log of all changes to a software project's code. Each time you make a change, you describe that change (a commit message) and then push that change to GitHub. GitHub also allows members of the public to '[fork](http://ben.balter.com/open-source-for-government/#forks)' existing projects, improve upon them, and then submit their changes back as a "[pull request](http://ben.balter.com/open-source-for-government/#pull_requests).” GitHub offers free public repositories for FOSS projects as well as subscription-based private repositories for closed projects. 

Agencies looking to get started should create an organisation account with GitHub, which can include an unlimited number of individual developer accounts. There is an existing government-friendly terms of service that GitHub has already reviewed and signed with many US based government entities (among others around the world). As the core purpose of GitHub is to track who made changes to what code and when, this may help with any requirements for public records keeping. Before using the service you should double check with your agency’s digital service procurement policy though referring back to the NZ Govt ICT Strategy there is a push to acquire more ICT resources on a services basis which aligns with what GitHub offers. [GitHub also has a Goverment CoP](https://government.github.com/) that any government staff with a .govt.nz email address account associated with their GitHub account can access and discuss the ideas of code sharing, open innovation and the use of social coding platforms within government.

## 5.3 What is CWP GitLab?
CWP GitLab is used to manage website projects on the CWP that are eventually deployed onto testing and later, production environments. It enables sharing, collaboration, and audit trails of the code worked on by development teams. It is run securely on the CWP infrastructure which is based within New Zealand. Agencies can choose whether code they produce is private or shared, on a case by case basis however as a matter of principle, if the agency has created reusable modular code it should be made open and available for others to use. CWP GitLab is provisioned as part of the shared services when an agency onboards to the CWP. Access to accounts can be granted to agency ICT staff and vendors working on their behalf. CWP GitLab is however not open to the wider FOSS community to contribute (though there are some [publicly listed modules](https://gitlab.cwp.govt.nz/public) available on CWP GitLab that agencies have listed as public). When existing FOSS modules are contributed to or an agency creates a new module which they would like to openly share, a more appropriate location to release this code is the social coding platform, GitHub. CWP GitLab has a virtually identical set of features to GitHub, however it is only accessible to those that have signed on to the CWP.

## 5.4 Where to start building projects and modules for the CWP?
Given git's distributed nature, modules are able to be started on CWP GitLab and later moved to the more open code sharing space, GitHub. This allows agencies new to the idea of code sharing a safe space to develop the initial set of code before open sourcing it and making it available to others in the FOSS community. However there are benefits for starting new open source modules directly in the most open space such as getting peer review early and attracting interest from other users in the community. You may even learn from the community at this point that such a module already exists and in this case perhaps the time is better spent improving the existing shared code rather than developing a new one from scratch. CWP also allows for modules to be made public and still reside on CWP Gitlab, note however that in this situation, developers outside of the CWP cannot give feedback or contribute improvements, therefore GitHub is preferred and not mandated. Private project code (code that is not modules and relates to the customisation of SilverStripe CMS) should also be kept on CWP GitLab. This space should be used as a collaborative coding space for the development team doing work on the project. It also need to reside here in order for it to be safely deployed on to the CWP instance environments.
